---
layout: post
title: Shape Up
type: blog
---

Insight - assumes everyone is a good actor, no bad actors. Doesn't factor oncall or company disruptions. Interdependencies who must also be on the same cycles. People quit and join. Resources are variable.

## Introduction
* Executing something the wrong way can destroy morale, grind teams down, erode trust, crunch gears and wreck the machinery of long term progress.
* We shape the work before giving it to a team. A small senior group works in parallel to the cycle teams. They define key elements of a solution before the project is ready to bet on. Projects are defined in the right level of abstraction - concrete enough that teams know what to do but abstract enough that they have room to work out the interesting details by themselves.
**Appetite : Instead of "How long will this take", we ask, "How much time do we want to spend".**
* We give full responsibility to a small team of designers and programmers. This frees up Sr folks to shape up better projects.
**We don't give a project to a team that still has rabbit holes or tangled interdependencies.**
* If a project runs over six weeks, it doesn't get an extension.
* We integrate design and programming early.

## Part one : Shaping.
* Don't overspecify design - it stifles creativity.
* Don't make it too abstract either.
* Properties of shaped work.
* Property 1 : It's rough.
  * Work that's too fine too early commits everyone to the wrong details.
  * **Designers and programmers need room to apply their own judgement and expertise when they roll up their sleeves and discover the trade-offs that emerge.**
* Property 2 : It's solved
  * Shaped work has been thought through - the main elements of the solution are there at the macro leve and connect together.
* Property 3 : It's bounded.
  * It tells the team what not to do. There's appetite - amount of time the team is allowed to spend on the project. This requires leaving specific things out.
* Who shapes - requires combining interface with tech and business priorities. You need to be a generalist or collaborate with 2 other people.
* Shaping is primarily design work. But you should be able to judge what's possible, what's easy and what's hard.
* You need to be strategic - why does it matter to implement this?
* It's a closed door, creative process.
* **Work on the shaping track is kept private and not shared with wider team until the commitment has been made to bet on it.**
* This enables shapers to drop it when it's not working out.
* Steps to shaping.
  1. Set boundaries via appetites.
    * We set appetite in 2 sizes (1) Small batch - takes 3 folks 2 weeks, or (2) Big Batch - takes 3 folks 6 weeks.
    * If it's beyond 6 weeks, we have to break the project into pieces.
    * Principle is **"Fixed time, variable scope".**
    * Responding to raw ideas : We should give new ideas space, and say "maybe". Not "yes" or "no" because we don't understand it yet.
    * Our appetite can also tell us how much research is worthwhile.
    * **Unclear ideas - the worst offenders are redesigns or refactoring that aren't driven by a use case.** Figure out the definition of done.
  2. Rough out on wireframes.
    * Get the right people in the room (or none).
    * Breadboarding and fat marker sketches - quickly draw different versions of flows to debate pros and cons.
    * Breadboading - only draw out (1) places - where users can navigate to (2) affordance - buttons and fields (3) connection lines - how affordance can take the user from place to place.
    * Breadboarding uses words to describe the UI flows. But if this isn't suitable, try fat marker sketches.
    * Fat marker sketch is made with such broad strokes that adding detail is difficult or impossible.
    * **Regardless of what you say, any specific mockups are going to bias what other people do after you—especially if you’re in a higher position than them.** This is why fat marker sketches leaves more room for designers to be creative.
    * At this stage we can walk away from the project. We haven't bet on it yet.
  3. Address risks and rabbit holes.
    * Well-shaped work - there's a slight chance it could take an extra week or two but the elements of the solution are defined enough that it shouldn't drag any longer.
    * In this step, we slow down and look critically - what did we miss? Are we making bad assumptions?
    * **One way is to walk through a use case in slow motion - how exactly would a user get from the starting point to the end? Slowing down and playing it out can revaeal gaps.**
    * Specifically call out cases you aren't supporting to keep the project within the appetite.
    * **Present to technical experts.** The question is not "is it possible". It is "is it possible within 6 weeks?"
  4. Write the pitch for betting table.
    * There are five ingredients that we always want to include in a pitch:
    1. Problem.
    2. Appetite.
    3. Solution- Show fat marker sketches.
    4. Rabbit holes.
    5. No-gos.
    * The first step for presenting a pitch is posting the write-up with all the ingredients above somewhere that stakeholders can read it on their own time. This keeps the betting table short and productive. If that isn’t possible in some cases, the pitch is ready to pull up for a quick live sell.

## Part two : Betting.
* At the betting table, we look at pitches from the past 6 weeks or pitches someone revived.
* There's no giant list of ideas or backlog grooming.
* If we don't bet on a pitch, we let it go. We don't need to track it.
* **What if the pitch was good but timing wasn't right? Anyone who wants to advocate for it again **tracks it independently**.
* We want decentralized lists, no giant backlog.
* **Regular 1:1s between departments helps to cross-pollinate ideas for what to do next.**
* This approach spreads out responsibility for tracking what to do. This way the conversation is always fresh.
* **Important ideas come back**.
* **We learned that 2 week sprints are too short to get anything meaningful done. And they're costly due to planning overhead. There's opportunity cost of breaking everyone's momentum to regroup.**
* People need to feel the deadline looming in order to make tradeoffs. So 6 weeks is appropriate.
* The end of a cycle is worst time to plan because everyone is busy making last-minute decisions to ship.
* **During cool-down, programmers and designers are free to work on whatever they want. After working hard of their project, they enjoy having time that's under their control.**
* Betting table is held during cooldown where **stakeholders** decide what to do in the next cycle.
* **The highest people in the company are there.** There's no step two to validate the plan or get approvals.
* Buy-in from the top is essential to making cycles turn properly.
* When you make a bet, you honor it. Don't allow the team to be interrupted. Losing momentum is really bad.
* If it's a real crisis, we can hit the brakes, but true crises are very rare.
* **Teams have to ship the work within the 6 weeks - if they don't finish, the project doesn't get an extension.**
* This eliminates the risk of runaway projects.
* If the project doesn't finish in 6 weeks, it means we did something wrong in the shaping.
* **The vast majority of bugs can wait 6 weeks. If we tried to eliminate every bug, we'd never be done.**
* Fix bugs during cool down, or bring it to the betting table, or schedule a bug bash (whole cycle to bugs).
* Don't carry scraps of old work without shaping and considering them as a new potential bet.
* Break the projects down into things that can be shipped in cycle-by-cycle.
* Shape up for New products are different from the regular shape up for building on existing products. There are 3 phases.
  1. R&D mode
    * Our idea is a theory, which means a lot of scrapwork. We can't reliably shape what we want in advance.
    * Instead of betting on a pitch, we bet on the time spent for investigation.
    * Instead of delegating to a team, Senior folks form the team. You can't delegate when don't kwow what you want yourself.
    * Also the leaders need to be able to judge the long-term effects of design decisions.
    * The aim is to spike, not to ship.
  2. Prod mode
    * This is like normal shape up for an existing product.
    * Shipping means merging into codebase, but not necessarily releasing to customers. We may want to remove some features.
  3. Cleanup mode.
    * There's no shaping - the cycle is closer to the bug bash mode.
    * Everyone jumps to help wherever they can.
    * Leadership makes final cut decisions before launch.
* **Generally we’ll avoid doing design work or discussing tech- nical solutions for longer than a few moments at the betting table.**
* Why a good pitch may still not be done now - Different projects require different expertise. Also, the type of work they wanna do. Availability is another factor.
* **Post a kickoff message about the bets.**

### Part three : Building.
