---
layout: post
title: Assume most code is already AI-Generated. Now what?
type: blog
tags: [Technology, AI]
---
My friends have frequently mentioned feeling like they're perpetually behind the latest trends in the AI landscape. It's easy to ignore the constant thrashing and wait for a winning idea. Yet the trends in the software industry indicate that the wait is over. In [Uber](https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/how-uber-uses-ai-for-development), 65% of code is written by AI; in [Spotify](https://techcrunch.com/2026/02/12/spotify-says-its-best-developers-havent-written-a-line-of-code-since-december-thanks-to-ai/) the best developers hardly write code and [Stripe](https://stripe.dev/blog/minions-stripes-one-shot-end-to-end-coding-agents) has developed agents that can one-shot tasks. It's a new paradigm of software development where most of the code is AI generated and humans are purely reviewing changes (if at all). It's worth engaging with these tools firsthand rather than waiting on the sidelines.

Models such as Claude Opus 4.6 along with Claude code have made software development accessible. Open-source libraries (e.g., [agency](https://github.com/msitarzewski/agency-agents)) can be added as Claude plugins. These agents can do research, create test plans, task breakdowns, etc. Agents can additionally be equipped with [skills](https://github.com/VoltAgent/awesome-agent-skills) to guide them to implement specific workflows. Custom skills can also be written by developers - these encapsulate the various conventions and gotchas in repos. They contain past learnings from older agentic output. These custom skills enable agents to implement tasks more effectively.

An effective developer is someone who can start multiple Claude sessions on multiple Git worktrees in order to parallelize multiple tasks. They use speech-to-text to provide instructions to each session. They may even have a session further subdivided into agent teams, further parallelizing within that 1 task. The developer spends most of their time context switching, directing the agent, reviewing plans and PRs. They frequently update agent skills to improve the quality of the agent output.

Reviewing plans and PRs is the next bottleneck standing in the path of automation. Will Larson explains that [judgement](https://lethain.com/judgment-is-all-you-need/) is one of the last remaining bottlenecks in the SDLC. Even so, I'd guess that most pre-Series A startups today merge changes directly into the master branch without any human reviews. For example, the creator of OpenClaw said he'd merge over 6000 PRs per month personally in a recent podcast. At Anthropic, teams create [prototypes](https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/building-claude-code-with-boris-cherny) before shipping a feature, skipping the product docs or UX artifacts. There will still be a class of difficult edge-cases that will need experienced professionals, along with incident response, but it's likely that judgement will automated given enough time. Until then, mature projects with real customers should continue to measure quality via DORA metrics along with newer metrics e.g., the time spent reviewing and correcting AI-generated code, skills used, skills that lead to bugs, PR cycle time for AI generated code, etc. We've already seen AWS outages and Claude related bugs caused by AI generated code.

Developers should aspire to become strategic thinkers. AI-forward firms are already toying with this idea. For example at Anthropic, everyone is a "Member of Technical Staff", working on product, design, infrastructure and research altogether. Closer to home in Toronto, Wealthsimple (a large fintech) has hired AI Builders. Industry shifts indicate that teams will become smaller over time, but a strategic thinker will be effective as new bottlenecks emerge. Some directions include: deepening domain knowlege, understanding customer uses cases and deciding what to build and why. As a manager, it will be important to create an environment where people can build strategic judgment through ownership of ambiguous problems and exposure to the customer and business goals.