---
layout: post
title: Impact of AI on the Software Industry, March 2026
type: blog
tags: [Technology, AI]
---
My friends have frequently mentioned feeling like they're perpetually behind the latest trends in the AI landscape. It's easy to ignore the constant trashing and wait for a winning idea. Yet the trends in the software industry indicate that the wait is over. In [Uber](https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/how-uber-uses-ai-for-development), 65% of code is written by AI; in [Spotify](https://techcrunch.com/2026/02/12/spotify-says-its-best-developers-havent-written-a-line-of-code-since-december-thanks-to-ai/) the best developers hardly write code and [Stripe](https://stripe.dev/blog/minions-stripes-one-shot-end-to-end-coding-agents) has developed agents that can one-shot tasks. Skeptics would do well to roll up their sleeves and dive headfirst into a new paradigm of software development where most of the code is AI generated and humans are purely reviewing changes (if at all).

Models such as Claude Opus 4.6 along with Claude code have made software development accessible. Open-source libraries (e.g., [agency](https://github.com/msitarzewski/agency-agents)) can be added as Claude plugins. These agents can do research, create test plans, task breakdowns, etc. Agents can additionally be equipped with [skills](https://github.com/VoltAgent/awesome-agent-skills) to guide them to implement specific workflows. Custom skills can also be written by developers - these encapsulate the various conventions and gotchas in repos. They contain past learnings from older agentic output. These custom skills enable agents to implement tasks more effectively.

The 10x developer is someone who can start multiple Claude sessions on multiple Git worktrees in order to parallelize work. Each session can further have multiple subagents (or even agent teams) working on the task at hand. The developer spends more time reviewing plans or PRs and updating agent skills. 

Reviewing plans and PRs is the next bottleneck standing in the path of automation. Will Larson explains that [judgement](https://lethain.com/judgment-is-all-you-need/) is one of the last remaining bottlenecks in the SDLC. Even so, I'd guess that most startups today merge changes directly into the master branch without any human reviews. For example, the creator of Open claw said he'd merge over 6000 PRs per month personally. In Anthropic, teams create [prototypes](https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/building-claude-code-with-boris-cherny) before shipping a feature, skipping the product docs or UX artifacts. Until we automate judgement completely (e.g., self-learning Datadog skill), mature projects with real customers should measure quality by defining new metrics e.g., the time spent reviewing and correcting AI-generated code, skills used, skills that lead to bugs, etc.

In the long term, software engineers will have to become strategic thinkers. AI-forward firms are already toying with this idea. For example in Anthropic, everyone is a "Member of Technical Staff", working on product, design, infrastructure and research altogether. Closer to home, my previous firm (Wealthsimple - a large fintech) has started hiring AI Builders. Mass layoffs are a portent that software teams will become smaller over time, but the strategic thinker will remain relevant as new bottlenecks emerge. It's also possible that AI will de-skill the mental faculties of the strategic thinker over time, or perhaps the pool of thinkers will shrink as younger people are excluded from hiring, denying them a chance to build up experience. Regardless, figuring out "what to build and why" will become an increasingly important skill for engineers and managers.