---
layout: post
title: Impact of AI on Managers
type: blog
tags: [Management, AI, Leadership]
---
Recent trends indicate that organizations want managers to code. For example, the CEO of Coinbase spoke of an internal shift in their company, where [player-coach managers](https://fortune.com/2026/05/05/coinbase-layoffs-14-of-employees-ai-tech-ai-job-anxiety-crypto/) are preferred. A player-coach manager balances IC duties with traditional people-management while a traditional manager shifts across multiple roles to help their team ([visionaries/team-builders/coaches/etc](https://dhruvgairola.com/Leadership-Styles/)). A sole emphasis on player-coach constrains a manager because it's harder for them to shift focus. For example, they will have less time to be strategic if they're also coding actively. I view the recent changes as a temporary change until the software industry stabilizes. It seems logical that managers should invest into building up AI skills as ICs in order to guide and support their teams through these transitions.

Even before the rise of LLMs, some companies preferred their managers to function as player-coaches exclusively. I have personally interviewed at companies where they expected managers to play a "tech lead" role. Google is an example where a flatter structure has always been the norm. Today, companies want more technically oriented managers because AI has made code production easier and more code reviewers are required. Developers have used techniques to make it safer to code with LLMs too (e.g., adding more context to LLMs, implementing quality harnesses, skills in the codebase, etc). Newer innovations (e.g., claude design and automated PRs) have further reduced barriers to production.

Managers are also expected to manage larger teams. An [article](https://fortune.com/2026/04/07/megamanager-era-how-many-direct-reports-ai-middle-management/) calls such people "megamanagers". In 2026, managers have an average of 12 direct reports compared to 6 reports a decade earlier. Two reasons are provided in the article - the expectation that AI tools can make managers more efficient, and flatter org structures. AI tools that can summarize meetings, emails, performance, etc can free up time. Meanwhile flatter org structures reduce handoffs and speed up decision-making. 

A consequence of larger teams is more context switching for the manger. Additionally, small subteams can execute greenfield projects efficiently with AI so there's increased parallelization of work and even more context switching. The smaller teams also favor Senior staff who can work more independently. Managers have to become extremely efficient with AI tools to manage large teams and free up their time to grow ICs or work on strategy and alignment.

To summarize, not only do managers have to be player-coaches and write/review code but they also have more reports. In order to guide their team, managers have to dig deep and get their hands dirty. It's not purely about writing good prompts but also experimenting with MCPs, skills, harnesses, new AI tools, [LLM wiki](https://gist.github.com/karpathy/442a6bf555914893e9891c11519de94f), etc. Managers should track newer types of metrics to ensure delivery and quality. ICs are feeling pressure too because parallel coding and reviewing AI generated PRs has become the new norm. Managers need to support ICs to remain optimistic through these changes until the software industry reaches some sort of an AI-equilibrium.