---
layout: post
title: Amp it up
type: blog
tags: [Leadership]
---

The book "Amp it up" by Frank Slootman was recommended to me by my VP. It provides an insight into the mind of a top-tier CEO. What was remarkable was the passion, energy, accountability and the high standards exemplified by Frank. Frank has an almost militaristic discipline and approach to leading a firm. He asserts that leaders set the pace, so a leader who moves with energy and urgency pushes the company foward.

I enjoyed reading the sections about strategy, because Frank explains that strategy and execution go hand-in-hand. He stresses that execution is usually the issue, not a failed strategy. As someone who is trying to get better at developing strategy, it was insightful to learn that a **person becomes a better strategist when their execution improves**. Frank avoids consultants because the they don't execute a strategy and can always shift blame when their proposed strategies don't work out. He likes people who deeply understand problems before jumping into solutions. He values energy, go-getters and people who show a ton of ownership and results.

The sections on hiring and firing also provide a glimpse into how much effort goes into building an incredible team. I've noticed a recurring theme across many of the books I've read- **top leaders move quickly when performance issues arise**. On a personal note, I have been slower to act when it comes to exiting employees. It's usually been due to my fear of making unpopular decisions. Early on in my leadership career, these metrics manifested in pulse surveys shortly after a firing. I remember attributing the results to tough firing decision. After reflection, I've understood that I had real gaps which were contributing to these metrics (the big one was holding people accountable). Experience is a great teacher. Importantly, I appreciated that Frank observed the tension between making tough decisions and employee-sentiment mechanisms, remarking that a leader has to make unpopular decisions from time to time.

Note from the book:
* Leaders set the pace.
* Hire more for aptitude. **Look for hunger and motivation.**
* A mission is big and focused.
* Show urgency.
* Small companies fight back with a superiority of product.
* Worrying about strategy before your team is good at executing is pointless.
* Jumping to conclusions without analysis and understanding of the problem can be devastating.
* Great operators live and breathe their own strategies. Consultants cannot help you with strategy because they can always blame the execution.
* **You will become a better strategist when your execution improves.**
* In an amped up company, execution is king.
* **Drivers exude energy, urgency, ambition and boldness.** Passengers are just along for the ride and likely to get caught in layoffs.
* Leaders are expected to have well developed hiring networks, ability to recruit and an eye for talent. Keep an active list and keep it ready and primed.
* **Once you're good at hiring and firing, you're well on your way to great results and a thriving career.**
* **Act forcefully on behalf of customers. Not just big ones but all of them, no exceptions.**
* Culture results from consequences and lack of consequences. You need to hold people accountable.
* In order to break silos, go direct instead of upwards. This should be encouraged in the company culture.
* Trust builds from delivering on expectations.
* **If you're wrong in understanding problems, solutions won't work.**
* Customer success is the responsibility of the entire company.
* If a startup shows profits, investors conclude that it doesn't know how to invest in further growth.
* You cannot overstate the importance of strong financial oversight and discipline on sales compensation. Sales shouldn't control their own compensation.
* Crossing the chasm is about jumping from a narrow niche to building a large and sustainable customer base. Early adopters like being cutting edge while late adopters like minimizing risk.
* Attack competitor weaknesses, not strength.
* **An energetic, engaging personality goes a long way in the workplace.**
* As a leader, written and spoken communication skills are extremely important, as well as domain expertise.
* Think about your career over the long haul and make decisions from that perspective.
* Good CEOs are comfortable asserting their authority and should lead the board, drawing proper boundaries to avoid being overrun.